and a debate on whether to call for a
ceasefire in Gaza brought the UK
Parliament into disarray with the
speaker of the house now accused of
Party politics nearly 60 MPS are calling
on speaker Lindsey Hoy to quit for his
handling of the Parliamentary session
the Scottish national party which had
tabled the motion and the conservative
government have both condemned him for
selecting the labor party's Amendment
they accused the speaker of trying to
avoid internal divisions within the
labor party despite his duty of
impartiality well for more this let's
speak to Harry forcet he's across this
forest from Westminster Harry it feels
like more and more MPS are piling on
here what kind of pressure is the
speaker under right
now well it's certainly increasing
pressure especially since in the last
hour or so the Scottish national party
officially said as a party it's the
third largest party in Parliament it had
no longer any confidence in lindsy Hoy
so Lindsey Hoy to carry on in his
position as Speaker of the House
accusing him of partisan politics in
favor of Labor uh during the debate uh
he came to the house himself a little
earlier in the day um and he apologized
again uh for the decision- making on
Wednesday uh but he said that it was out
of concern for MP's safety uh he said he
never wanted to pick up a phone and find
that one of his friends on either side
of the house had been murdered by
terrorists to use his to ology that that
follows the killing of an MP in 2021 it
follows a number of death threats that a
lot of MPS have been talking about and
part of his calculations he is saying uh
in his decision yesterday to allow the
labor amendment to be voted upon was to
get the broadest range of possible
options for MPS to make sure that they
weren't voting in some way against their
conscience and opening themselves up to
potential danger at their constituency
offices or their homes uh the the labor
leader Kia starma has also been talking
he was accused by the conservative party
of having lent on uh K on the speaker of
the house to ensure that uh his
amendment was able to be voted on to try
to stem any potential Rebellion within
his ranks um he denied having threatened
the speaker but he did say that he had
urged him to allow the amendment to be
voted upon Harry can you explain for
viewers what exactly was quite so
controversial about his decision on
Wednesday because it's it's obviously
within the context of the way that the
UK House
Runs it is and usually when on an
opposition day as it was on Wednesday an
opposition day for the Scottish national
party when such a party puts forward a
motion usually it would be that motion
and only the conservative government or
the government of the day's amendment to
that motion that would be voted on if
that had been the case on Wednesday that
would have put labor in a very difficult
position because uh labor would have
seen its MPS either having to vote with
the Scottish national party for uh an
immediate ceasefire in Gaza without any
uh sort of further caveat uh about as in
Labour's Amendment there was about uh
Israel not being expected to be able to
continue to cease fire if it did no
longer faced a threat if it continued
rather to face a threat from Hamas and
there were very other various other
caveats along those lines and so his
decision to dispense with tradition and
the usual running of things to allow
that labor Amendment really allowed
labor to uh have its own MPS vote with
it and not have a potentially
politically damaging uh result another
one uh in the House of Commons in the
runup to an election so that's why it
was controversial the Scottish national
party says that it wanted to have its
own motion voted upon as well because it
mentioned Collective punishment of
Palestinians in Gaza labor accuses the
Scottish national party of playing
politics Itself by trying to engineere
such a division and Rebellion within
labor ranks so all of this has really
been sort of leveraging to some extent
uh at least it's being seen by many to
be leveraging what's been going on in
Gaza uh as part of a sort of domestic
political uh game and calculation and
that is why so many people have
expressed such dismay at what happened
on Wednesday and along with that there
is this very serious question over the
future uh of the speaker of the house
and indeed we'll see whether he survives
this Harry forcet there with all the
latest for us from Westminster thank you
Harry